(upbeat music)
All right, In this video we're gonna talk about
making reusable layouts in Gatsby.
And this is pretty handy because most likely
you're gonna want a general structure,
a header, a footer, a nav.
Something that is on either all pages or most pages.
I'm gonna show you how to do both.
So let's go into our components folder here
and let's make a new file
and call it capital L Layout.js.
And Gatsby doesn't have any special layout system in it.
So there's no special layout thing in Gatsby.
Simply you are just using react components
with children components inside of it.
So let's do our whole import react from react
and then we will export default function, capital L layout.
And then from that let's return a div
and inside of that let's give ourselves a...
let's just start with the nav.
Nav and then just P-I-M, the page content.
Oh, one thing we didn't do here is...
you'll see this underlined here, nav is not defined.
We did not import that.
So we can either go into here and import the nav
or one thing I really like to do
if you're using VS code is you can hit control + space.
When you have your cursor I think in the middle
or I usually have it at the end of the component here.
And that will bring up what's called code actions
in VS code and usually,
they will have a bunch of auto imports.
So let's see or in this one right here.
It's usually either this like
brick with squares around it or this cube.
And if you hover over top of it,
it'll say auto import nav element.
So I'll give that a click or just use your keyboard.
You can see that it automatically
added that import statement on top.
So that's almost what I do all the time.
I'll just use the component
and then it will give me a little red squiggle
and I'll have it auto import which is pretty cool.
Let's do the same for footer.
So we'll go into our components,
make a new file, call it capital F footer.js.
Import react from react.
Export default, function footer.
Then inside of that we'll just return a footer tag
that has a P just says footer.
And maybe let's do something,
let's do something better.
We'll say and copy semi colon,
I'll say slick's slices and then we'll do
the current date and the way that you can get
the current date is just curly brackets.
So that lets JSX know that we're gonna run
a little bit of JavaScript right now.
And then in here, we'll say new date.get full year.
And that should bring in the current year.
Then we'll go back to our layout here
and give ourselves a footer tag.
And you notice I'm self closing these.
I certainly could also do open and close footer tag
and that just has to do with whether
there are children that are passed to that component.
And in our case, there's no children to the footer
and no children to the nav.
So we can just self close it like that.
Now you see here,
curly or we got squiggles underneath it.
So we wanna auto import it,
so we could be suckers and write it like that
or we could use the auto import.
I'm gonna hit my control + Space,
brings up code actions.
And then that pink cube is the auto import.
And you'll see it automatically imported it for us.
Now how do we then use this layout that we have?
Well, we can go...
let's go into our index page.
And instead of having a div that wraps around
every one of our pages,
let's replace that div
with a capital L layout component that we just made.
Now, again we need to auto import.
You see why this thing is so handy.
I just quickly hit control + Space,
brought up my code actions, found my layout,
hit enter and imported all of the components there.
Now you'll see when we are visiting the homepage.
This is I am the page content.
You can still see our nav here.
Let's go to the pizzas page as well.
So that little shortcut that I just did there
was I hit command P.
I believe it's Ctrl + P on Windows
and that brought up my quick open,
rather than route around in the sidebar,
you can just search for a file that you want.
And I know it's called pizzas.jazz
and it tells me it's in the pages directory.
I'll replace that with a layout again.
And we need to import it.
So anytime that you're using a component
in a file or another component in Gatsby
and this is just react in general,
you must import that component into that file.
So that's react basics
but I thought I mentioned just in case it's not known.
So I'm on the homepage now
and if I click on the pizza menu,
you see that we get the same thing.
So now the question is how do we get the content
that was passed down or put in between
the layout tag for each one?
Right? Let's go back to our layout component here
and we take a look at our layout
and every react component will receive
something that is called props
and props are things that are passed to the component.
So if we were to console.log,
the props of that component.
And I like to just give it a refresh
when we do something like that
cause sometimes a lot of garbage in the console here.
You'll see that props is an object, open that up
and there is only one prop and that is children.
But if someone were to use it...
What page is this?
The index, if you were to say layout and age is equal to
say 523, the first is equal to Wes.
And now you see when we refresh it,
you'll see that all of the things that were then passed
both as props into the component
as well as children are then gonna be showing up.
So in our case we don't really care about these things
but we do care about what children are being passed.
So you see here we got two children.
The first one is a nav component
and the second one is Hey! I am the homepage.
So how do we then render out what was passed to it?
Well we can go into our layout here
and replace the I Am the page content
with curly bracket, props.children.
Now you see if we go to our homepage,
it says I'm the homepage.
If we go to our pizza page,
it says I'm the pizzas page.
Our home page has a double nav going on here.
So let's take a look at that.
We no longer need to put the nav element
on each individual page
because that is now part of our layout component.
So we can get rid of that there.
You'll see it's now showing up.
A little bit further...
It's unlikely that or not unlikely
but you'll more commonly see
not the props object being passed as one big payload
and then accessing the things via .notation.
More often what you're going to see,
is you're gonna see this props object
being destructured in the function.
So what that means is that we just wanna pluck out
children from that prop.
So what we'll do is delete props use curly brackets,
that's to destructure the values
and then we'll just grab children directly
and put it into a top level variable.
You'll see now we don't have props variable.
And now we just have a variable called children.
You will see a little red underline here under my children.
It's telling us that it's missing in props validation.
And that's just telling us that generally
when you have a component that expects a prop,
you assign prop types to make sure that in development
it's being passed the proper things.
I'm gonna be leaving those out of this course.
Just because I know a lot of people rather use TypeScript
or they have their own way to do their props
and it's a lot of typing for something that is very simple.
So I am going to be leaving them out
but I will leave the warnings in there.
You can turn them off on your ESN config if you'd like.
So that's our layout now
and if we want that to go on to our pizza page.
Let's go to our pizzas here.
We have that there.
Now, you may be asking okay,
why else do I need to then...
like put that on every single page
that I want it to show up?
And the answer is maybe.
So do you want every single page
to have the layout component wrapped around it?
Well, there's two options.
You can just go into every single page
and wrap your page in the layout component.
Or what we can do is we can take advantage
of some of the Gatsby custom files
that will automatically wrap them for us.
So those are referred to as the Gatsby browser
and the Gatsby SSR files.
So what we can do is we can go into our Gatsby main folder.
So not in the source folders is really important.
Again I'm gonna say not in the source folders
often I'll get people to make this file in the wrong folder
and then they lose their afternoon, that sucks.
So right in the Gatsby root folder,
we're going to make a special file
called Gatsby-browser.js.
And Gatsby-browser.js is a specific Gatsby file
that will allow us to hook into
different API's of Gatsby if we need to.
So by default Gatsby is not gonna
wrap your pages in a layout component
but if we want to we can hook into
the wrap page element hook
and Gatsby will automatically do that for us.
So we don't need to do it on every single page.
So we need to import react from react.
And then we will make a function
called wrap page element.
Now, you might be saying like
why did you call it that?
Well, if we Google that
and you'll see that that is in the Gatsby docs.
We search for it and you'll see it says
allow a plugin to wrap the page element.
So what we're essentially doing here
is we're making our own little plugin
that anytime Gatsby renders out a page,
it will wrap that in something.
So that will give us a couple arguments in there.
We get the element, the page element
and then we also get the props that were then passed to it.
And from that we can return.
Let's just return like a div with a poop emoji in it.
And then finally, you need to export default.
No, no, not default, just export that function
and Gatsby's going to...
when it sort of fires up the browser,
It's gonna check this file
for a function called wrap page element.
It's gonna say, "Hey, I'm about to like,
ship this page to the browser,
like do you wanna do anything?
Like wrap the page element?"
In an our case we say, "Yeah, I wanna wrap it in her case
a div with the poop inside of it."
So now if we go back here
and refresh the page nothing happens.
Okay so this is something
that will probably change in Gatsby
but right now whenever you modify one of these files,
you have to quit the build and restart it.
So we have to go back to our terminal here.
And I got to kill it with Control + C.
I always like to clear up my terminal
and then we run NPM start again.
And then wait for a second
for the entire build process to restart.
So again anytime we're working in Gatsby browser,
there's another one called Gatsby node,
Gatsby config and Gatsby SSR.
We'll learn about what those all are in this course.
You have to kill the process
or restart it that hopefully will change.
If you get a little pop up on your website
that says would you like to restart the build?
Then that will happen automatically.
I'm hoping that will land pretty soon in Gatsby.
Looks like it's got up and running about
seven seconds now refresh the page(laughs).
And all we see is a poop.
Why? Because what we did is
we just have a react component here that returns a poop
and obviously that's not what we want.
We want a curly bracket and put the element inside of that
and then we also want to pass down any props
from the page element to our layout component.
So we'll say ...props and that is what is referred to as
a spread element.
We're getting a bit of an error here,
let's see what we got here.
React does not recognize the page resources
prop on a DOM element,
if you're intentionally wanting to appear...
Oh, okay.
That's because I'm using a DOM element here
and not a react component.
And most likely what we want
is we actually don't want div,
we want our layout components.
Let's do that. Capital L layout.
By the way this, you see how I'm typing
and it's renaming the closing tag as well.
That is an extension in VS code called auto rename tag.
So if you want that one,
I'll maybe I'll stick that
in the list of recommended extensions as well.
So I think that's super handy for everybody.
So we have our layout.
Now we need to import it.
Here we go. Here we go.
It's showing up on the homepage.
On every single page now that we go to,
we don't necessarily need to
wrap it in the layout component.
We're seeing double nav,
because if we go to our homepage,
we no longer need to manually wrap this layout here.
We can in our case,
we could simply just return the paragraph tag
or what I like to do is return
what's called a react fragment
and a react fragment is...
I like to think of it as a ghost element.
It will render out to nothing
and it will allow us to return two elements at once.
Hey, I'm another element.
And see if I were to just return two paragraph tags,
It yells at us about returning adjacent JSX LMC
can't return two or more things always must be one.
So if that's what you want,
then you have to put react fragments
around our ghost elements and everything will work.
So let's go through our pages real quick.
And make sure that we're no longer
wrapping in a layout.
So 404 is fine.
Our beers page we no longer need this div.
We no longer need the nav.
Index page is fine. Order page is fine.
Actually we don't need that.
Pizzas page no longer need the layout
cause that automatically happens.
Let's make it a react fragment.
Again you don't need to hear and watch.
If I remove that fragment
and just return a paragraph tag, It still works
but more than likely,
you don't just want a paragraph tag,
you're gonna want divs and all kinds of interesting stuff.
So I like to start with the fragment.
And then finally slice masters
don't need the nav, don't need that.
So nice and clean way.
Finally, this only works in the browser
which is why we put it in Gatsbybrowser.js.
So we also need to put it in another file
that's called Gatsby-SSR.
And the difference between those two files
is that Gatsby browser will run
once the page has been loaded.
And once the page has been generated in the browser
but Gatsby also generates everything on the server
so that it's server rendered and really fast.
So we need to create another file in here
that is called Gatsby-ssr.js.
Again that is in the root of the folder.
And you can literally just copy everything
from Gatsby browser and paste it right in there.
You could even import this function
and export it directly but let's just keep it simple here.
So that is how you do layouts in Gatsby.
We're going to jump into some CSS pretty soon
and start to get this thing
looking like a decent website now.